# Free Space Management

- **Free Space Management**: he free space you are managing consists of variable-sized
units; this arises in a user-level memory-allocation library (as in malloc()
and free()) and in an OS managing physical memory when using seg-
mentation
- **External Fragmentation**: the free space gets chopped into little pieces of different sizes and is thus fragmented; sub-requests may fail because there is no single continuous space that can satisfy the request even if the total amount of free space exceeds the size of the request.
- **Internal Fragmentation**: if an allocator hands out chunks of memory bigger than requested, any unasked/ unused space in chunk is considered internal fragmentation
- Low Level Mechanisms 
    - **Splitting**: it will find a free chunk of memory that can satisfy the request and split it into two.
        - in `free(void *ptr)` passing a pointer without specifying the size of that pointer, for that we take a space of the requested size in `pointer = malloc(size)` for header
        - **Header**: is an extra information block which kept in memory to store the size of pinter and a magic pointer to provide additional integrity checking to speed up deallocating 
        - the size of the free region is the size of the header plus the
        size of the space allocated to the 
    - **Coalescing**: go through the list and merge neighboring chunks; when finished, the heap will be whole again.

- growing heap in os: Most traditional allocators start with a small-sized heap and then re-quest more memory from the OS when they run out. 

## basic strategies for managing free space.
- **Best Fit**:  by returning a block that is close
to what the user asks, best fit tries to reduce wasted space. However, there
is a cost; naive implementations pay a heavy performance penalty when
performing an exhaustive search for the correct free block.

- **Worst Fit**: find the largest chunk and return the requested amount; Worst fit tries to thus leave big chunks free instead of lots of 164 FREE-SPACE MANAGEMENT
small chunks that can arise from a best-fit approach. that it performs badly, leading to excess fragmentation while still having high overheads.

- **First Fit**:  finds the first block that is big enough and
returns the requested amount to the user.advantage of speed, to use address-based ordering; by keeping the list ordered by the address of the free space

**Next Fit**: keeps an extra pointer to the location within the
list where one was looking last. quite similar to first fit, as an exhaustive search is once again avoided.


**segregated lists**: if a particular application has one (or a few) popular-sized request that it makes, keep a separate list just to manage objects of that size; all other requests are forwarded to a more general memory allocator. when the kernel boots up, it allocates a number of object caches for kernel objects that are likely to be requested frequently